Operating similarly to the governor's Pardon Advisory Board, the Commutation Advisory Board will hold hearings to review applications and make non-binding recommendations to the governor. Their first meeting is set to occur in June 2026. The governor will announce additional board members in the coming weeks, as well as a date for the board's first meeting.
In addition to Barnes and O'Donnell, the board will consist of members with experience and expertise in a diverse cross-section of criminal justice, including victims' advocates, law enforcement, corrections, and former members of the judiciary, among others.
Executive Order #287 can be found here.
Gov. Evers today also signed Executive Order #288, which specifically creates a commutation process designed for youth offenders who are sentenced to life in prison.
Executive Order #288 recognizes that, "a growing body of neuroscientific and psychological research has demonstrated that an individual's brain, behavior, and personality undergo significant changes throughout their teen years and into their twenties." Research indicates, as the order further notes, that until brains are fully formed, individuals are "more susceptible to external pressures from peers, and [are] less capable of understanding the consequences of criminal actions." The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized these scientific developments in Miller v. Alabama, holding that regardless of the offense committed, mandatory life sentences without the possibility of parole are unconstitutional with respect to juvenile defendants." Indeed, as the governor's order notes,
"individuals who commit crimes in their youth therefore possess
increased potential for rehabilitation, a diminished degree of culpability, and a lower chance of reoffending once they have reached maturity."
Under Gov. Evers' Executive Order #288, much like the criteria under Executive Order #287, youth convicted of a life sentence who are seeking a commutation will be required to "provide notice of the application to the circuit court and district attorney's office that oversaw their conviction, if they can be found," to ensure the circuit court and district attorney's office may provide feedback to the Commutation Advisory Board on the individual's application for a commutation.
Similarly, Executive Order #288 also requires that victims registered with the state Office of Victim Services and Programs receive notice to facilitate feedback from registered victims on the commutation application to ensure survivors and victims and their families have the opportunity to provide input.
The Commutation Advisory Board will also have access to records of an applicant's programming, work history, and conduct in prison from the Department of Corrections.
In evaluating applications for commutations for youth, under the governor's directives in Executive Order #288, the Commutation Advisory Board must consider:
• The impact of commutation on victims, survivors, and community members;
• Whether a commutation is consistent with public safety and in the interests of justice;
• An applicant's prison conduct record; and
• An applicant's personal growth and development since conviction, including the completion of rehabilitative programs, treatment, education, and work history during their incarceration.
Executive Order #288 is available here. More information about the commutations process is available here.
Over a year ago, Gov. Evers unveiled a comprehensive corrections reform plan to improve public safety across Wisconsin, reduce short and long-term costs to taxpayers, lower rates of recidivism, support corrections staff, and stabilize the state's skyrocketing prison population. The governor's plan included a
"domino" series of facility changes, improvements, and modernization efforts across Wisconsin's correctional institutions, including ultimately closing Green Bay Correctional Institution (GBCI) in 2029 and wholly rehabilitating and transforming Waupun Correctional Institution (WCI), facilities that were both built in the 1800s.
To date, now well beyond a year after the governor introduced his proposal, Republican lawmakers have thus far introduced virtually no real or meaningful plan to close GBCI, reform WCI, or otherwise address the state's burgeoning prison population, which continues to drive new and exorbitant costs for Wisconsin taxpayers due to chronic overcrowding well beyond the build capacity of Wisconsin's correctional institutions.