FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: April 3, 2026
Contact: GovPress@wisconsin.gov
Gov. Evers Signs Executive Orders Restoring Commutations Process in Wisconsin
Evers to become first Wisconsin governor since former Gov. Thompson to issue commutations, announces first Commutation Advisory Board appointments
MADISON — Gov. Tony Evers today signed two executive orders to reinstate Wisconsin's process for issuing commutations, including creating a new Commutation Advisory Board. The governor, who reinstated Wisconsin's pardon process after taking office and has since issued a record-breaking 2,000 pardons more than any governor in modern Wisconsin state history—today signed two executive orders to continue building upon his efforts to reform Wisconsin's justice system in the absence of the Wisconsin State Legislature's efforts to reform the state's criminal justice system. Governors as recent as former Gov. Tommy Thompson have commuted sentences to address incarceration rates and recognize the importance of rehabilitating Wisconsinites. More information about executive clemency powers and their use by past governors is available in a memo prepared by the nonpartisan Legislative Reference Bureau. The governor today also created a commutation process that is specifically designed for youth offenders. Additional information about both orders is available below.
"It's time for Wisconsin to join red and blue states across our country and finally move our justice system into the 21st Century by reforming our criminal justice and corrections systems to improve public safety, reduce the likelihood that individuals will reoffend when they enter our communities, and save taxpayer dollars in the long run. Issuing official grants of forgiveness through pardons has been one of the most rewarding parts of my job as governor, and I'm looking forward to restoring the commutations process in Wisconsin for the first time since Tommy Thompson was governor," said Gov. Evers.
"Wisconsin cannot wait for criminal justice reforms," Gov. Evers continued. "As our prison population continues to skyrocket, increasing costs to taxpayers on overtime and other resource needs, the Legislature must start working toward making long-term justice and corrections reforms a priority, including efforts to help stabilize our state's prison population that our institutions already are struggling to accommodate. For years, I've asked the Legislature to work with me to invest in behavioral and mental health services, treatment and diversion, and reentry programming these are evidence-based and data-driven policies we know will help keep our communities safer while continuing to ensure dangerous individuals remain in our institutions. My administration will continue doing what we can as long as I am governor, but we cannot do it alone-the Legislature must get serious about this issue."